#+TITLE:The Verger
#+AUTHOR:W Somerset Maugham

There had been a christening that afternoon at St Peter's, Neville
Square, and Albert Edward Foreman still wore his verger's gown. He
kept his new one, its folds as full and stiff as though it were made
not of alpaca but of perennial bronze, for funerals and weddings (St
Peter's, Neville Square, was a church much favoured by the fashionable
for these ceremonies) and now he wore only his second-best. He wore it
with complacence, for it was the dignified symbol of his office, and
without it (when he took it off to go home) he had the disconcerting
sensation of being somewhat insufficiently clad. He took pains with
it; he pressed it and ironed it himself. During the sixteen years he
had been verger of this church he had had a succession of such gowns,
but he had never been able to throw them away when they were worn out
and the complete series, neatly wrapped up in brown paper, lay in the
bottom drawers of the wardrobe in his bedroom.

The verger busied himself quietly, replacing the painted wooden cover
on the marble font, taking away a chair that had been brought for an
infirm old lady, and waited for the vicar to have finished in the
vestry so that he could tidy up in there and go home. Presently he saw
him walk across the chancel, genuflect in front of the high altar, and
come down the aisle; but he still wore his cassock.

"What's he 'anging about for?" the verger said to himself. "Don't'e
know I want my tea?

The vicar had been but recently appointed, a red-faced energetic man
in the early forties, and Albert Edward still regretted his
predecessor, a clergyman of the old school who preached leisurely
sermons in a silvery voice and dined out a great deal with his more
aristocratic parishioners. He liked things in church to be just so,
but he never fussed; he was not like this new man who wanted to have
his finger in every pie. But Albert Edward was tolerant. St Peter's
was in a very good neighbourhood and the parishioners were a very nice
class of people. The new vicar had come from the East End and he
couldn't be expected to fall in all at once with the discreet ways of
his fashionable congregation.

"All this 'ustle; said Albert Edward. "But give 'im time, he'll
learn."

When the vicar had walked down the aisle so far that he could address
the verger without raising his voice more than was becoming in a place
of worship he stopped.

"Foreman, will you come into the vestry for a minute. I have something
to say to you." "Very good, sir."

The vicar waited for him to come up and they walked up the church
together.

"A very nice christening, I thought, sir. Funny 'ow the baby stopped
cryin' the moment you took him."

"I've noticed they very often do," said the vicar, with a little
smile. "After all I've had a good deal of practice with them."

It was a source of subdued pride to him that he could nearly always
quiet a whimpering infant by the manner in which he held it and he was
not unconscious of the amused admiration with which mothers and nurses
watched him settle the baby in the crook of his surpliced arm. The
verger knew that it pleased him to be complimented on his talent. The
vicar preceded Albert Edward into the vestry. Albert Edward was a
trifle surprised to find the two churchwardens there. He had not seen
them come in. They gave him pleasant nods.

"Good afternoon, my lord. Good afternoon, sir," he said to one after
the other.

They were elderly men, both of them, and they had been churchwardens
almost as long as Albert Edward had been verger. They were sitting now
at a handsome refectory table that the old vicar had brought many
years before from Italy and the vicar sat down in the vacant chair
between them. Albert Edward faced them, the table between him and
them, and wondered with slight uneasiness what was the matter. He
remembered still the occasion on which the organist had got into
trouble and the bother they had all had to hush things up. In a church
like St Peter's, Neville Square, they couldn't afford a scandal. On
the vicar's red face was a look of resolute benignity, but the others
bore an expression that was slightly troubled.

"He's been naggin' them, he 'as," said the verger to himself. "He's
jockeyed them into doin' something, but they don't 'alf like
it. That's what it is, you mark my words."

But his thoughts did not appear on Albert Edward's clean-cut and
distinguished features. He stood in a respectful but not obsequious
attitude. He had been in service before he was appointed to his
ecclesiastical office, but only in very good houses, and his
deportment was irreproachable. Starting as a page-boy in the household
of a merchant prince, he had risen by due degrees from the position of
fourth to first footman, for a year he had been single-handed butler
to a widowed peeress, and, till the vacancy occurred at St Peter's,
butler with two men under him in the house of a retired ambassador. He
was tall, spare, grave, and dignified. He looked, if not like a duke,
at least like an actor of the old school who specialized in dukes'
parts. He had tact, firmness,-and self-assurance. His character was
unimpeachable.

The vicar began briskly.

"Foreman, we've got something rather unpleasant to say to you. You've
been here a great many years and I think his lordship and the general
agree with me that you've fulfilled the duties of your office to the
satisfaction of everybody concerned."

The two churchwardens nodded.

"But a most extraordinary circumstance came to my knowledge the other
day and I felt it my duty to impart it to the churchwardens. I
discovered to my astonishment that you could neither read nor write."

The verger's face betrayed no sign of embarrassment.

"The last vicar knew that, sir," he replied. "He said it didn't make
no difference. He always said there was a great deal too much
education in the world for 'is taste."

"It's the most amazing thing I ever heard," cried the general. "Do you
mean to say that you've been verger of this church for sixteen years
and never learned to read or write."

"I went into service when I was twelve, sir. The cook in the first
place tried to teach me once, but I didn't seem to 'ave the knack for
it, and then what with one thing and another I never seemed to'ave the
time. I've never really found the want of it. I think a lot of these
young fellows waste a rare lot of time readin' when they might be
doin' something useful."

"But don't you want to know the news? said the other
churchwarden. "Donâ€™t you ever want to write a letter?"

"No, me lord, I seem to manage very well without. And of late years
now they've all these pictures in the papers I get to know what's
goin' on pretty well. Me wife's quite a scholar and if I want to write
a letter she writes it for me. It's not as if I was a bettin' man"

The two churchwardens gave the vicar a troubled glance and then looked
down at the table.

"Well, Foreman, I've talked the matter over with these gentlemen and
they quite agree with me that the situation is impossible. At a church
like St Peter's, Neville Square, we cannot have a verger who can
neither read nor write."

Albert Edward's thin, sallow face reddened and he moved uneasily on
his feet, but he made no reply.

"Understand me, Foreman, I have no complaint to make against you. You
do your work quite satisfactorily; I have the highest opinion both of
your character and of your capacity; but we haven't the right to take
the risk of some accident that might happen owing to your lamentable
ignorance. It's a matter of prudence as well as of principle."

"But couldn't you learn, Foreman? asked the general.

"No, sir, I'm afraid I couldn't, not now. You see, I'm not as young as
I was and if I couldn't seem able to get the letters in me 'ead when I
was a nipper I don't think there's much chance of it now."

"We don't want to be harsh with you, Foreman," said the vicar. "But
the churchwardens and I have quite made up our minds. We'll give you
three months and if at the end of that time you cannot read and write
I'm afraid you'll have to go."

Albert Edward had never liked the new vicar. He'd said from the
beginning that they'd made a mistake when they gave him St Peter's. He
wasn't the type of man they wanted with a classy congregation like
that. And now he straightened himself a little. He knew his value and
he wasn't going to allow himself to be put upon. "I'm very sorry, sir,
I'm afraid it's no good. I'm too old a dog to learn new tricks. I've
lived a good many years without knowin' 'ow to read and write, and
without wishin' to praise myself, self praise is no recommendation, I
don't mind sayin' I've done my duty in that state of life in which it
'as pleased a merciful providence to place me, and if I could learn
now I don't know as I'd want to."

"In that case, Foreman, I'm afraid you must go."

"Yes, sir, I quite understand. I shall be 'appy to 'and in my
resignation as soon as you've found somebody to take my place."

But when Albert Edward with his usual politeness had closed the church
door behind the vicar and the two churchwardens he could not sustain
the air of unruffled dignity with which he had borne the blow
inflicted upon him and his lips quivered. He walked slowly back to the
vestry and hung up on its proper peg his verger's gown. He sighed as
he thought of all the grand funerals and smart weddings it had
seen. He tidied everything up, put on his coat, and hat in hand walked
down the aisle. He locked the church door behind him. He strolled
across the square, but deep in his sad thoughts he did not take the
street that led him home, where a nice strong cup of tea awaited him;
he took the wrong turning. He walked slowly along. His heart was
heavy. He did not know what he should do with himself. He did not
fancy the notion of going back to domestic service; after being his
own master for so many years, for the vicar and churchwardens could
say what they liked, it was he that had run St Peter's, Neville
Square, he could scarcely demean himself by accepting a situation. He
had saved a tidy sum, but not enough to live on without doing
something, and life seemed to cost more every year. He had never
thought to be troubled with such questions. The vergers of St Peter's,
like the popes of Rome, were there for life. He had often thought of
the pleasant reference the vicar would make in his sermon at evensong
the first Sunday after his death to the long and faithful service, and
the exemplary character of their late verger, Albert Edward
Foreman. He sighed deeply. Albert Edward was a non-smoker and a total
abstainer, but with a certain latitude; that is to say he liked a
glass of beer with his dinner and when he was tired he enjoyed a
cigarette. It occurred to him now that one would comfort him and since
he did not carry them he looked about him for a shop where he could
buy a packet of Gold Flake. He did not at once see one and walked on a
little. It was a long street, with all sorts of shops in it, but there
was not a single one where you could buy cigarettes.

"That's strange," said Albert Edward.

To make sure he walked right up the street again. No, there was no
doubt about it. He stopped and looked reflectively up and down.

"I can't be the only man as walks along this street and wants a fag,"
he said. "I shouldn't wonder but what a fellow might do very well with
a little shop here. Tobacco and sweets, you know."

He gave a sudden start.

"That's an idea," he said. "Strange 'ow things come to you when you
least expect it."

He turned, walked home, and had his tea.

"You're very silent this afternoon, Albert," his wife remarked. "I'm
thinkin'," he said.

He considered the matter from every point of view and next day he went
along the street and by good luck found a little shop to let that
looked as though it would exactly suit him. Twenty-four hours later he
had taken it, and when a month after that he left St Peter's, Neville
Square, for ever, Albert Edward Foreman set up in business as a
tobacconist and newsagent. His wife said it was a dreadful come-down
after being verger of St Peter's, but he answered that you had to move
with the times, the church wasn't what it was, and 'enceforward he was
going to render unto Caesar what was Caesar's. Albert Edward did very
well. He did so well that in a year or so it struck him that he might
take a second shop and put a manager in. He looked for another long
street that hadn't got a tobacconist in it and when he found it, and a
shop to let, took it and stocked it. This was a success too. Then it
occurred to him that if he could run two he could run half a dozen, so
he began walking about London, and whenever he found a long street
that had no tobacconist and a shop to let he took it. In the course of
ten years he had acquired no less than ten shops and he was making
money hand over fist. He went round to all of them himself every
Monday, collected the week's takings, and took them to the bank.

One morning when he was there paying in a bundle of notes and a heavy
bag of silver the cashier told him that the manager would like to see
him. He was shown into an office and the manager shook hands with him.

"Mr Foreman, I wanted to have a talk to you about the money you've got
on deposit with us. D'you know exactly how much it is?"

"Not within a pound or two, sir; but I've got a pretty rough idea."

"Apart from what you paid in this morning it's a little over thirty
thousand pounds. That's a very large sum to have on deposit and I
should have thought you'd do better to invest it."

"I wouldn't want to take no risk, sir. I know it's safe in the bank."

"You needn't have the least anxiety. We'll make you out a list of
absolutely giltedged securities. They'll bring you in a better rate of
interest than we can possibly afford to give you."

A troubled look settled on Mr Foreman's distinguished face. "I've
never 'ad anything to do with stocks and shares and I'd 'ave to leave
it all in your 'ands," he said.

The manager smiled. "We'll do everything. All you'll have to do next
time you come in is just to sign the transfers."

"I could do that all right," said Albert uncertainly. "But 'ow should
I know what I was signin'?

"I suppose you can read," said the manager a trifle sharply.

Mr Foreman gave him a disarming smile.

"Well, sir, that's just it. I can't. I know it sounds funny-like, but
there it is, I can't read or write, only me name, an' I only learnt to
do that when I went into business."

The manager was so surprised that he jumped up from his chair.

"That's the most extraordinary thing I ever heard."

"You see, it's like this, sir, I never 'ad the opportunity until it
was too late and then some'ow I wouldn't. I got obstinate-like."

The manager stared at him as though he were a prehistoric monster.

"And do you mean to say that you've built up this important business
and amassed a fortune of thirty thousand pounds without being able to
read or write? Good God, man, what would you be now if you had been
able to?"

"I can tell you that, sir," said Mr Foreman, a little smile on his
still aristocratic features. "I'd be verger of St Peter's, Neville
Square."
